---
description: >-
  Both humans and other sentient/conscious species have rights and/or interests
  that must be considered.
---

# Sentientism

Theresa Ann Campo Pearson or as I will refer to her as Baby Theresa was born in Florida in 1992. Unfortunately, she was born with one of the worst genetic disorders one could have, it's fairly common and it’s named anencephaly. Anencephalic babies are sometimes referred to as “babies without brains”, and while that’s not an accurate description, functionally that is what they might as well be. Anencephalics miss the most important part of the brain, that being the cerebrum, which is the largest part of the brain and is responsible for consciousness. Sadly, an anencephalic will always die from cardio-respiratory arrest within a few hours or a few days. Knowing that Baby Theresa would die soon, her parents volunteered her organs for immediate transplant as infant organs are scarce, thousands of infants need transplants each year. When American children under the age of two are waiting for a transplant, 30 to 50 percent die before an organ becomes available. But to the parents’ dismay, Florida law forbade the removal of organs until the donor was dead. By the time Baby Theresa passed away, her organs had deteriorated too much to be harvested and transplanted. Within the medical and bioethics community, Baby Theresa’s case was widely debated. When first reading about this, it seemed like an open and shut case. It's wrong to kill someone, especially an infant just to save another person. Most of us would find that morally intuitive, but one has to ask “Who was Baby Theresa?”

In 1967, Christian Barnard performed the first ever successful heart transplant, a procedure that  saves many lives to this day. Back then, we understood death as occurring when your heart beat  stops, but this seems like faulty reasoning. Cardiac arrest involves the sudden loss of heart functioning, while many people unfortunately die from this, one can be resuscitated and live a  healthy life onward. We now understand death not as a single event, but a series of physical  events, it's not simply the cessation of breathing and heartbeat. Brain death is our new legal  standard for what we consider to be the end of one's life. This solved the problem about  transplants, because a brain-dead patient can still have a healthy heart, suitable for transplant.  While anencephalics do not technically fit the criteria of braindead, as their brain functions just  to a basically braindead extent, I still think it’d be fair to argue that Baby Theresa was never  really alive. Remember the word I mentioned earlier: “consciousness”. Consciousness is  responsible for the awareness of our world, without it, no one would exist and no one would  know that no one exists: “I think therefore I am”. It’s a scary thing to think about but just know  that you will always have experienced life but you will never have experienced death. An anencephalic will have never experienced life, which is unfortunate, but their body dying isn’t the thing that is unfortunate as they were already dead.  Now imagine if the Earth blew up, that would suck, not because the Earth would be personally offended but because of all the conscious beings destroyed, with their presumed desires and  interests thwarted. Now imagine a planet located in a galaxy besides the Milky Way, assuming  that there was no extraterrestrial life in this galaxy, if this planet were to be blown up, why would that be unfortunate? It may be a pretty looking planet but besides that nothing is really lost.&#x20;

Morality is a social phenomenon, this isn’t saying that it’s subjective, just that we as people use  ethics in our daily lives to determine whether to do something or not. Morality is defined by  “principles concerning the distinction between right and wrong or good and bad behavior.”  Notice the word “behavior”, how could one possibly have good and bad behavior if there were no  conscious beings? How could one even judge the behavior if one isn’t conscious? Moral evaluation  requires consideration of preferences about the state of the universe, but to even consider that,  you’d have to have preferences which in turn requires consciousness.

I think I’ve given a sufficient enough explanation as to why consciousness is a prerequisite for having moral concern at all. In his Introduction to Applied Ethics, Peter Singer provides a pretty succinct explanation for this view:

> The capacity for suffering and enjoying things is a prerequisite for having interests at all, a condition that must be satisfied before we can speak of interests in any meaningful way. It would be nonsense to say that it was not in the interests of a stone to be kicked along the road by a child. A stone does not have interests because it cannot suffer. Nothing that we can do to it could possibly make any difference to its welfare. A mouse, on the other hand, does have an interest in not being tormented, because mice will suffer if they are treated in this way. If a being suffers, there can be no moral justification for refusing to take that suffering into consideration. No matter what the nature of the being, the principle of equality requires that the suffering be counted equally with the like suffering – in so far as rough comparisons can be made – of any other being. If a being is not capable of suffering, or of experiencing enjoyment or happiness, there is nothing to be taken into account. This is why the limit of sentience (...) is the only defensible boundary of concern for the interests of others.>
